# Python Data Structures

## 6.1 Strings

* A string is a sequence of characters.
* You can access the characters one at a time with the bracket operator:
  * the index is an offset from the beginning of the string, and the offset of the first letter is zero.
* You can use any expression, including variables and operators, as an index, but the value of the index has to be an integer. Otherwise you get: `TypeError`
```python
fruits = 'banana'
friuits[0]
```

* String literal uses either single or double quotes
* For strings, `+` means concatenate
* When string has numbers, its still a string
* to convert string to number use `int()`

### Strings Have Length

* `len` is a built-in function that returns the number of characters in a string:
```python
>>> fruit = 'banana'
>>> len(fruit)
6
```

* To get the last character, you have to subtract 1 from length
```python
>>> last = fruit[length-1]
>>> print(last)
a
```

* Alternatively, you can use negative indices, which count backward from the end of the string. The expression fruit[-1] yields the last letter, fruit[-2] yields the second to last, and so on.

### Traversal through a string with a loop

* A lot of computations involve processing a string one character at a time. Often they start at the beginning, select each character in turn, do something to it, and continue until the end. This pattern of processing is called a `traversal`.
* One way to write a traversal is with a while loop:
  * This loop traverses the string and displays each letter on a line by itself.
```python
index = 0
while index < len(fruit):
    letter = fruit[index]
    print(letter)
    index = index + 1
```
* Another way to write a traversal is with a for loop:
  * Each time through the loop, the next character in the string is assigned to the variable char. The loop continues until no characters are left.
```python
for char in fruit:
    print(char)
```
* Definite loop using a `for` loop is much more elegant and is a much more simple loop

### Slicing Strings

* A segment of a string is called a slice. Selecting a slice is similar to selecting a character:
```python
>>> s = 'Monty Python'
>>> print(s[0:5])
Monty
>>> print(s[6:12])
Python
```
* We use the colon operator, the operator returns the part of the string from the “n-th” character to the “m-th” character, including the first but excluding the last.
* If you omit the first index (before the colon), the slice starts at the beginning of the string. If you omit the second index, the slice goes to the end of the string:
```python
>>> fruit = 'banana'
>>> fruit[:3]
'ban'
>>> fruit[3:]
'ana'
```
* If the first index is greater than or equal to the second the result is an empty string, represented by two quotation marks:
```python
>>> fruit = 'banana'
>>> fruit[3:3]
''
```

### Strings are immutable

* you can’t change an existing string. The best you can do is create a new string that is a variation on the original
