# Python Data Structures

## 8.1 Lists

### Programming

* Algorithms
  * A set of rules or steps used to solve a problem
* Data Structures
  * A particular way of organizing data in a computer

### Collection

* A collection allows us to put many values in a single variable
  * Most variables have one value in them, mostly are overwritten
* A collection is nice to have bc we can have many values in one variable

```python
friends = ['Joseph','Glen','Sally']
```

### Lists

* Lists are surrounded by square brackets and elements in list are seperated by commas
  * The values in list are called `elements` or sometimes `items`.
* Can by any Python object, even another list
* Can also be empty
```python
[10, 20, 30, 40]
['crunchy frog', 'ram bladder', 'lark vomit']
```
* The elements of a list don’t have to be the same type.
* A list within another list is nested.
* A list that contains no elements is called an empty list; you can create one with empty brackets,` []`.
```python
>>> cheeses = ['Cheddar', 'Edam', 'Gouda']
>>> numbers = [17, 123]
>>> empty = []
>>> print(cheeses, numbers, empty)
['Cheddar', 'Edam', 'Gouda'] [17, 123] []
```

### Looking Inside Lists

* Like strings, we can get any single element using index specifed in square brackets
```python
friends = ['Joseph','Glen','Sally']
print(friends[1])
# Glen
```

### Lists are mutable

* Lists are `mutable` we can change an element of a list using index operator
* Unlike strings, lists are mutable because you can change the order of items in a list or reassign an item in a list.
```python
>>> numbers = [17, 123]
>>> numbers[1] = 5
>>> print(numbers)
[17, 5]
```
* You can think of a list as a relationship between indices and elements. This relationship is called a `mapping`; each index “maps to” one of the elements.
* List indices work the same way as string indices:
  * Any integer expression can be used as an index.
  * If you try to read or write an element that does not exist, you get an IndexError.
  * If an index has a negative value, it counts backward from the end of the list.
  * The `in` operator also works on lists.
```python
>>> cheeses = ['Cheddar', 'Edam', 'Gouda']
>>> 'Edam' in cheeses
True
>>> 'Brie' in cheeses
False
```

### How Long is a List?

* `len()` takes a list as a paramter and returns number of elements
  * `len(list)`

### Using Range Function

* range function returns list of numbers that range from zero to one less than paramter
* can construct index loop using for and integer iterator

### Traversing a list

* The most common way to traverse the elements of a list is with a `for` loop
```python
for cheese in cheeses:
    print(cheese)
```
* But if you want to write or update the elements, you need the indices. A common way to do that is to combine the functions `range` and `len`
```python
for i in range(len(numbers)):
    numbers[i] = numbers[i] * 2
```

